1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monetary Policy Review: No. 0 1 - January  2024 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka maintains policy interest rates at their 
current levels   
 
The Monetary Policy Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at its meeting held on 2 2 January  
2024, decided to maintain  the Standing Deposit Facility Rate (SDFR) and the Standing Lending 
Facility Rate (SLFR) of the Central Bank at their current levels of  9.00 per cent and 10.00 per 
cent, respectively. The Board arrived at this decision following a comprehensive assessment of 
domestic and international macro economic developments  in order  to maintain  inflation at  the 
targeted level of 5 per cent  over the medium term , while  enabl ing the economy to reach  its 
potential . The Board took note of  the effects of  the recent developments in taxation and  
supply -side factors that are likely to pose upside pressures on inflation in the near term. However,  
the Board viewed that the impact of these developments would not materially change the 
medium -term inflation outlook . Further, the Board noted the space created by past monetary 
policy easing measures  and the decline in the risk premia attached to  government securities for 
further downward adjustment in market lending interest rates. The Board underscored that the 
envisaged benefit of further reduction in market lending interest rates need s to be adequately 
and swiftly passed on to the businesses and individuals by financial institutions.    
Inflation is expected to stabilise at the desired levels as the effects of the recent tax 
adjustment s and supply  side disruptions  are expected to dissipate in the near term  
Headline inflation, as measured by the year -on-year change in the Colombo Consumer Price 
Index (CCPI, 2021=100) , was recorded at 4.0 per cent in Decem ber 2023 , compared to  3.4 per 
cent in Novem ber 2023. Following five consecutive months of deflation, the food category 
recorded inflation (year-on-year) in December 2023  reflecting mainly the weather -related 
disruptions , while non -food inflation (year -on-year) moderated  compared to the previous month.  
Despite the recent acceleration, h eadline inflation  remains closer to the inflation target of the 
Central Bank and is in line with the envisaged inflation projections  of the Central Bank . Meanwhile, 
core inflation (year -on-year) continued to moderat e in Decem ber 2023, compared to the previous 
month, reflecting the subdued demand pressures in the economy. Headline inflation is projected  
to record an upward movement in the near term , as expected , driven mainly  by domestic price 
Economic Research Department  
23 January  2024 
2 
 adjustments due to the increase in the Value Added Tax (VAT) and the elimination of certain VAT 
exemptions effective 01 January 2024 , disruptions to the domestic food supply,  and the dissipation 
of the favourable statistical base effect. However, this acceleration of inflation  in the near term  is 
expected to be short -lived, and the spillover effects of such one -off adjustment s are likely to be 
muted due to subdued underlying demand conditions.  Therefore, o ver the medium term, headline 
inflation is expected  to gradually stabilise around the targeted level of 5 per cent (year -on-year), 
supported by appropriate policy measures.  
 
Note: A forecast is neither a promise nor a commitment.  
The projections reflect the available data, assumptions and judgements made at the forecast round in January 2024. They are conditional 
on the forecasts of global energy and food prices; gradual growth recovery of Sri Lanka’s major trading partners; the anticip ated domestic 
fiscal path in line with the IMF -EFF proj ections under the debt restructuring scenario  and global financial conditions implied by the 
monetary policy stance of the USA. Further, the projections are conditional on the model -consistent interest rate path and the resulting 
macroeconomic responses. A ny notable change in these assumptions could lead to the realised inflation path deviating from the 
projected path.  
Given the prevailing domestic and global economic uncertainties, adverse weather conditions and geopolitical tensions, the ri sks 
associated with the current projections are higher than in normal times. These risks arise due to the possibility of various factors deviating 
from the levels already internalised in projections, either explicitly or implicitly, and due to any unforeseen developments.  In particular, 
there are upside risks to inflation projections stemming from factors such as the possibility of mo re than anticipated second -round 
impacts of increased taxation; possible wage hikes; the impact of possible adverse weather on agricultural production and in turn on 
food inflation; the uncertainty over global oil, energy and food prices, particularly amid st volatile geopolitical tensions, etc. Meanwhile, 
downside risks to inflation projections include the possibility of price reductions in domestically manufactured items amidst  increased 
competition from imports and the sustained impact of diminished purch asing power of the public.  
The Central Bank remains committed to communicating any changes to the inflation outlook to the public on a regular basis, enabling 
the public to make informed decisions.   -1501530456075
21/IV 22/I IIIIIIV23/I IIIIIIV24/I IIIIIIV25/I IIIIIIVRealised Projection
50% CI 70% CI 90% CI Realised Inflation
Source:  Central Bank Staff Projections  Headline Inflation Projections  
CCPI * (quarterly average, y -o-y, %)  
 
The fan chart illustrates the uncertainty surrounding the baseline projection path using confidence bands of gradually fading  colours. 
The confidence intervals (CI) shown on the chart indicate the ranges of values within which inflation may fluctuate over the medium 
term. For example, the thick green shaded area represents the 50 per cent confidence interval, implying that there is a 50 pe r cent 
probability that the actual inflation outcome will be within this interval. The confidence bands show the increas ing uncertainty in 
forecasting inflation over a longer horizon.  *Note: Realised data up to Q4 2022 shown in the fan chart are based on the CCPI (2013=100, seasonally adjusted), while data after th is period are based on the 
CCPI (2021=100, seasonally adjusted). Projections are based on all available data at the forecast round in January 2024.  
3 
 A further decline in market  lending  interest rates is expected in the period ahead  
Market interest rates continue d to adjust downwards  in line with eased monetary policy and 
administrative measures taken to reduce overall market lending interest rates. Moreover, y ields 
on government securities continue to decline  supported by falling risk premia . The Monetary 
Policy Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka  is of the view that there is further space for market 
interest rates, especially the lending interest rates and yields on government securities to decline 
in the period ahead, in line with the reduction in  policy interest rates  effected in the recent past . 
Meanwhile, r eflecting the transmission of the relaxed monetary policy stance , outstanding credit 
to the private sector by the banking sector continued to expand notably on a month -on-month 
basis in Novem ber as well as December  2023. The expansion in credit to the private sector is 
expected to be sustained in the period ahead, supported by the further easing of monetary 
conditions . 
 
Domestic economic activity is expected to sustain the recovery over the medium term  
The Sri Lankan economy recorded an expansion in the third quarter of  2023 , following six 
consecutive quarters of economic contraction. Accordingly, the economy is estimated to have 
grown  by 1.6 per cent, year -on-year, in the third quarter of  2023 , as per the GDP estimates 
published by the Department of Census and Statistics (DCS) . This was a broad -based expansion 
in economic activity s upported by expansions recorded in Agriculture , Industry and Services 
sectors, on a year -on-year basis.  The rebound in domestic economic activity is expected  to be 
sustained , supported by the faster passthrough of relaxed monetary policy to broader market 
interest rates  and the resultant firming of credit demand,  improvements in business and investor 
sentiments, improvements in supply conditions  and the gradual rebound expected in external 
demand conditions .  
 
The external sector is expected to remain resilient in the period ahead  
The merchandise trade deficit is estimated to have moderated during  2023 in comparison to 
2022 . This, coupled with the notable recovery in trade in services, mainly earnings from tourism, 
and the strong momentum of workers’ remittances , is expected to have resulted in a surplus in 
the current account balance of the ba lance of payment s for 2023.  Gross official reserves  (GOR)  
improved notably to US dollars 4.4 billion by end December 2023 , which includ e the swap facility 
from the People’s Bank of China  (PBOC) . This strong rebound of GOR was supported by the 
notable net purchases by the Central Bank from the domestic  forex market and the proceeds 
from multilateral agencies . The Sri Lanka rupee, which appreciated by around 12 per cent against 
the US dollar in 2023 , continued to show an appreciat ion so far in 2024 . 
4 
 Policy interest rates are maintained at their current levels   
In consideration of the current and expected macroeconomic developments highlighted above, 
and in keeping with the forward guidance provided at the last monetary policy review  in 
November 2023 , the Monetary Policy Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, at its meeting held 
on 22 January  2024, decided to maintain  the Standing Deposit Facility Rate (SDFR) and the 
Standing Lending Facility Rate (SLFR) of the Central Bank at their current levels of  9.00 per cent 
and 10.00 per cent, respectively. The Board was of the view that there is  space for market interest 
rates to continue to adjust downwards in line with past monetary policy easing measures  and the 
falling risk premia attached to  government securities . In particular, t he Board anticipates a broad -
based reduction in overall market lending interest rates in line with the monetary policy easing 
measures effected since June 2023 . The Monetary Policy Board will continue to assess risks to 
inflation  projections , among others, and stand ready to take appropriate measures to maintain 
domestic price stability in the period ahead while supporting the economy to reach its potential.  
 
Monetary 
Policy 
Decision  Policy interest rates and SRR unchanged  
Standing Deposit Facility Rate (SDFR)  9.00%  
Standing Lending Facility Rate (SLFR)  10.00%  
Statutory Reserve Ratio (SRR)  2.00%  
 
 
INFORMATION NOTE:  
A press conference, chaired by Governor Dr. P Nandalal Weerasinghe, will be held on 2 3 
January 2024 at 11. 00 am at the Atrium of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, and proceedings will 
be livestreamed on Facebook and YouTube.  
 
The release of the next regular statement on monetary policy review will be on 26 March 2024 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  Data Annexure  is accessible  at https://www.cbsl.gov.lk/sites/default/files/cbslweb_documents/mpr01_2024_e.pdf   
